About Us
====================================

The following authors provide long-term support for this project. If you
notice anything in the project that is not as expected, please do not
hesitate to contact us.

`Zhi ZHANG <mailto:tczhangzhi@gmail.com>`__: received the M.Eng. degree
at the College of Computer Science and Software Engineering from
Shenzhen University, China, in 2021. He is currently with the Hong Kong
Polytechnic University as a PhD candidate. His research interests mainly
include graph convolutional networks, abnormal event detection, and EEG
analysis.

`Sheng-hua ZHONG <mailto:csshzhong@szu.edu.cn>`__: received the
Ph.D. degree from the Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University in 2013. Currently, she is an Associate Professor in College
of Computer Science & Software Engineering at Shenzhen University. Her
research interests include multimedia content analysis and brain
science.

`Yan LIU <mailto:csyliu@comp.polyu.edu.hk>`__: is the director of
cognitive computing lab and the group leader of artificial intelligence
and robotics AIR research group. She obtained Ph.D. degree in computer
Science from Columbia University in the US. In 2005, she joined The Hong
Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, where she is currently an
Associate Professor with the Department of Computing. Her research
interests span a wide range of topics, ranging from brain modeling and
cognitive computing, image/video retrieval, computer music to machine
learning and pattern recognition.